

105. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A. 2013 Mar 5;110(10):E928-37. doi:
10.1073/pnas.1301100110. Epub 2013 Feb 19.

Unraveling the signaling pathways promoting fibrosis in Dupuytren's disease
reveals TNF as a therapeutic target.

Verjee LS(1), Verhoekx JS, Chan JK, Krausgruber T, Nicolaidou V, Izadi D,
Davidson D, Feldmann M, Midwood KS, Nanchahal J.

Author information: 
(1)Kennedy Institute of Rheumatology, University of Oxford, London W6 8LH, United
Kingdom.

Dupuytren's disease is a very common progressive fibrosis of the palm leading to 
flexion deformities of the digits that impair hand function. The cell responsible
for development of the disease is the myofibroblast. There is currently no
treatment for early disease or for preventing recurrence following surgical
excision of affected tissue in advanced disease. Therefore, we sought to unravel 
the signaling pathways leading to the development of myofibroblasts in
Dupuytren's disease. We characterized the cells present in Dupuytren's tissue and
found significant numbers of immune cells, including classically activated
macrophages. High levels of proinflammatory cytokines were also detected in
tissue from Dupuytren's patients. We compared the effects of these cytokines on
contraction and profibrotic signaling pathways in fibroblasts from the palmar and
nonpalmar dermis of Dupuytren's patients and palmar fibroblasts from
non-Dupuytren's patients. Exogenous addition of TNF, but not other cytokines,
including IL-6 and IL-1β, promoted differentiation into specifically of palmar
dermal fibroblasts from Dupuytren's patients in to myofibroblasts. We also
demonstrated that TNF acts via the Wnt signaling pathway to drive contraction and
profibrotic signaling in these cells. Finally, we examined the effects of
targeted cytokine inhibition. Neutralizing antibodies to TNF inhibited the
contractile activity of myofibroblasts derived from Dupuytren's patients, reduced
their expression of α-smooth muscle actin, and mediated disassembly of the
contractile apparatus. Therefore, we showed that localized inflammation in
Dupuytren's disease contributes to the development and progression of this
fibroproliferative disorder and identified TNF as a therapeutic target to
down-regulate myofibroblast differentiation and activity.

DOI: 10.1073/pnas.1301100110 
PMCID: PMC3593900
PMID: 23431165  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
