

107. PLoS One. 2014 Nov 7;9(11):e112457. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112457.
eCollection 2014.

Identification of histological patterns in clinically affected and unaffected
palm regions in dupuytren's disease.

Alfonso-Rodríguez CA(1), Garzón I(2), Garrido-Gómez J(3), Oliveira AC(2),
Martín-Piedra MÁ(2), Scionti G(2), Carriel V(2), Hernández-Cortés P(3), Campos
A(2), Alaminos M(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Histology (Tissue Engineering Group), University of Granada,
Granada, Spain, and Instituto de Investigación Biosanitaria ibs, Granada, Spain; 
Ph.D. Programme in Biomedicine, University of Granada, Granada, Spain.
(2)Department of Histology (Tissue Engineering Group), University of Granada,
Granada, Spain, and Instituto de Investigación Biosanitaria ibs, Granada, Spain. 
(3)Division of Trauma and Orthopedic surgery, University Hospital San Cecilio,
Granada, Spain.

Dupuytren's disease is a fibro-proliferative disease characterized by a disorder 
of the extracellular matrix (ECM) and high myofibroblast proliferation. However, 
studies failed to determine if the whole palm fascia is affected by the disease. 
The objective of this study was to analyze several components of the
extracellular matrix of three types of tissues-Dupuytren's diseased contracture
cords (DDC), palmar fascia clinically unaffected by Dupuytren's disease
contracture (NPF), and normal forehand fascia (NFF). Histological analysis,
quantification of cells recultured from each type of tissue, mRNA microarrays and
immunohistochemistry for smooth muscle actin (SMA), fibrillar ECM components and 
non-fibrillar ECM components were carried out. The results showed that DDC
samples had abundant fibrosis with reticular fibers and few elastic fibers, high 
cell proliferation and myofibroblasts, laminin and glycoproteins, whereas NFF did
not show any of these findings. Interestingly, NPF tissues had more cells showing
myofibroblasts differentiation and more collagen and reticular fibers, laminin
and glycoproteins than NFF, although at lower level than DDC, with similar
elastic fibers than DDC. Immunohistochemical expression of decorin was high in
DDC, whereas versican was highly expressed NFF, with no differences for aggrecan.
Cluster analysis revealed that the global expression profile of NPF was very
similar to DDC, and reculturing methods showed that cells corresponding to DDC
tissues proliferated more actively than NPF, and NPF more actively than NFF. All 
these results suggest that NPF tissues may be affected, and that a modification
of the therapeutic approach used for the treatment of Dupuytren's disease should 
be considered.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0112457 
PMCID: PMC4224499
PMID: 25379672  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
