

12. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2014 Oct 30;15:361. doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-15-361.

Psychometric evaluation of the Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) 
with Dupuytren's contracture: validity evidence using Rasch modeling.

Forget NJ, Jerosch-Herold C, Shepstone L, Higgins J(1).

Author information: 
(1)École de réadaptation, Université de Montréal, Montreal, Canada.
johanne.higgins@umontreal.ca.

BACKGROUND: Dupuytren's contracture is a progressive, fibroproliferative disorder
that causes fixed finger contractures and can lead to disability. With the
advances of new therapeutic interventions, the necessity to assess the functional
repercussions of this condition using valid, reliable and sensitive outcome
measures is of growing interest. The Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder and Hand
(DASH) is one frequently used patient-reported outcome measure but its
reliability and validity have never been demonstrated specifically for a
population affected with Dupuytren's contracture. The objective of this study was
to evaluate the psychometric properties of the DASH, with focus on validity
evidence using the Rasch measurement model.
METHODS: Secondary analysis was performed on data collected as part of a
randomised clinical trial. One hundred fifty-three participants diagnosed with
Dupuytren's contracture completed the DASH at four time points (pre-op, 3, 6 and 
12 months post-op). Baseline data were analysed using traditional analysis and to
test whether they adhered to the expectations of the Rasch model.
Post-intervention data were subsequently included and analyzed to determine the
effect of the intervention on the items.
RESULTS: DASH scores demonstrated large ceiling effects at all time points.
Initial fit to the Rasch model revealed that the DASH did not adhere to the
expectations of the Rasch partial credit model (χ2=119.92; p<0.05). Multiple
items displayed inadequate response categories and two items displayed
differential item functioning by gender. Items were transformed and one item
deleted leading to an adequate fit. Remaining items fit the Rasch model but still
do not target well the population under study.
CONCLUSIONS: The original version of the 30-item DASH did not display adequate
validity evidence for use in a population with Dupuytren's contracture. Further
development is required to improve the DASH for this population.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2474-15-361 
PMCID: PMC4228176
PMID: 25358527  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
