

122. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2016 Jan;137(1):165-73. doi: 10.1097/PRS.0000000000001878.

Patients' Preferences for Treatment for Dupuytren's Disease: A Discrete Choice
Experiment.

Kan HJ(1), de Bekker-Grob EW, van Marion ES, van Oijen GW, van Nieuwenhoven CA,
Zhou C, Hovius SE, Selles RW.

Author information: 
(1)Rotterdam and Hilversum, The Netherlands From the Departments of Plastic and
Reconstructive Surgery and Hand Surgery, Public Health, and Rehabilitation
Medicine and Physiotherapy, Erasmus University Medical Centre; and the Xpert
Clinic.

BACKGROUND: Although in modern medicine, patients' preferences are important,
these have never been defined for characteristics of Dupuytren treatment. This
study determines these patients' preferences using a discrete choice experiment.
METHODS: A multicenter discrete choice experiment study was conducted among
patients with Dupuytren's disease who had been treated previously. Patients were 
asked about their preferences for attributes of Dupuytren treatments using
scenarios based on treatment method, major and minor complication rates,
recurrence rates, convalescence, residual extension deficit after treatment, and 
aesthetic results. The relative importance of these attributes and the tradeoffs 
patients were willing to make between them were analyzed using a panel latent
class logit model.
RESULTS: Five-hundred six patients completed the questionnaire. All
above-mentioned attributes proved to influence patients' preferences for
Dupuytren treatment (p < 0.05). Preference heterogeneity was substantial. Men who
stated they performed heavy labor made different tradeoffs than women or men who 
did not perform heavy labor. In general, recurrence rate (36 percent) and
extension deficit (28 percent) were the most important attributes in making
treatment choices, followed by minor complication rate (13 percent). Patients
accepted an increase in recurrent disease of 11 percent if they could receive
needle aponeurotomy treatment instead of limited fasciectomy.
CONCLUSIONS: This study confirms the importance of low recurrence rates and
complete contracture corrections, but also emphasizes the significance of low
complication rates. Convalescence was not an attribute, which scored high. The
preference heterogeneity shows that patient consultations need to be targeted
differently, which may result in different treatment decisions, depending on
patient characteristics and preferences.

DOI: 10.1097/PRS.0000000000001878 
PMID: 26710020  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
