

138. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2013 Nov;132(5):1139-48. doi: 10.1097/PRS.0b013e3182a3bf2b.

Adipose-derived stem cells inhibit the contractile myofibroblast in Dupuytren's
disease.

Verhoekx JS(1), Mudera V, Walbeehm ET, Hovius SE.

Author information: 
(1)Rotterdam, The Netherlands; and Stanmore, United Kingdom From the Department
of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, Erasmus Medical Center; and the Institute 
of Orthopedics and Musculoskeletal Sciences, University College London.

BACKGROUND: In an attempt to provide minimally invasive treatment for Dupuytren's
disease, percutaneous disruption of the affected tissue followed by lipografting 
is being tested. Contractile myofibroblasts drive this fibroproliferative
disorder, whereas stem cells have recently been implicated in preventing
fibrosis. Therefore, the authors tested the role of stem cells in modulating
myofibroblast activity in Dupuytren's disease.
METHODS: The authors compared the effect of co-culturing Dupuytren's
myofibroblasts with either adipose-derived or bone-marrow-derived stem cells on
isometric force contraction and associated levels of α-smooth muscle actin mRNA
and protein expression. The authors also tested the effect of these stem cells on
Dupuytren's myofibroblast proliferation and assessed whether this was mediated by
cell-to-cell contact or by a paracrine mechanism.
RESULTS: Addition of adipose-derived stem cells to Dupuytren's myofibroblasts
reduced the contraction of the latter, with a corresponding reduction of α-smooth
muscle actin protein expression, probably through a dilution effect. In contrast,
bone marrow-derived stem cells increased myofibroblast contractility. In
addition, adipose-derived stem cells inhibit myofibroblast proliferation and
mediate these effects by soluble factors, influenced by cell-to-cell
contact-dependent signaling.
CONCLUSION: Adipose-derived stem cells inhibit the contractile myofibroblast in
Dupuytren's disease, and these findings lend support to the potential benefit of 
lipografting in conjunction with aponeurotomy as a novel strategy for the
treatment of Dupuytren's disease.

DOI: 10.1097/PRS.0b013e3182a3bf2b 
PMID: 23924646  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
