

139. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2016 Jan 13;17:20. doi: 10.1186/s12891-016-0884-3.

What are we measuring? A critique of range of motion methods currently in use for
Dupuytren's disease and recommendations for practice.

Pratt AL(1), Ball C(2).

Author information: 
(1)Division of Occupational Therapy and Community Nursing, College of Health and 
Life Sciences, Brunel University, Kingston Lane, Uxbridge, UB8 3PH, UK.
anna.pratt@Brunel.ac.uk. (2)Kennedy Institute, University of Oxford, Roosevelt
Drive, Oxford, OX3 7FY, UK. cathy.ball@kennedy.ox.ac.uk.

BACKGROUND: Range of motion is the most frequently reported measure used in
practice to evaluate outcomes. A goniometer is the most reliable tool to assess
range of motion yet, the lack of consistency in reporting prevents comparison
between studies. The aim of this study is to identify how range of motion is
currently assessed and reported in Dupuytren's disease literature. Following
analysis recommendations for practice will be made to enable consistency in
future studies for comparability. This paper highlights the variation in range of
motion reporting in Dupuytren's disease.
METHODS: A Participants, Intervention, Comparison, Outcomes and Study design
format was used for the search strategy and search terms. Surgery, needle
fasciotomy or collagenase injection for primary or recurrent Dupuytren's disease 
in adults were included if outcomes were monitored using range of motion to
record change. A literature search was performed in May 2013 using subject
heading and free-text terms to also capture electronic publications ahead of
print. In total 638 publications were identified and following screening 90
articles met the inclusion criteria. Data was extracted and entered onto a
spreadsheet for analysis. A thematic analysis was carried out to establish any
duplication, resulting in the final range of motion measures identified.
RESULTS: Range of motion measurement lacked clarity, with goniometry reportedly
used in only 43 of the 90 studies, 16 stated the use of a range of motion
protocol. A total of 24 different descriptors were identified describing range of
motion in the 90 studies. While some studies reported active range of motion,
others reported passive or were unclear. Eight of the 24 categories were
identified through thematic analysis as possibly describing the same measure,
'lack of joint extension' and accounted for the most frequently used.
CONCLUSIONS: Published studies lacked clarity in reporting range of motion,
preventing data comparison and meta-analysis. Percentage change lacks context and
without access to raw data, does not allow direct comparison of baseline
characteristics. A clear description of what is being measured within each study 
was required. It is recommended that range of motion measuring and reporting for 
Dupuytren's disease requires consistency to address issues that fall into 3 main 
categories: Definition of terms, Protocol statement, Outcome reporting.

DOI: 10.1186/s12891-016-0884-3 
PMCID: PMC4712477
PMID: 26762197  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
