

161. BMC Musculoskelet Disord. 2013 Apr 10;14:131. doi: 10.1186/1471-2474-14-131.

Optimal functional outcome measures for assessing treatment for Dupuytren's
disease: a systematic review and recommendations for future practice.

Ball C(1), Pratt AL, Nanchahal J.

Author information: 
(1)Kennedy Institute, University of Oxford, Aspenlea Road, London W6 8LH, UK.
cathy.ball@kennedy.ox.ac.uk

BACKGROUND: Dupuytren's disease of the hand is a common condition affecting the
palmar fascia, resulting in progressive flexion deformities of the digits and
hence limitation of hand function. The optimal treatment remains unclear as
outcomes studies have used a variety of measures for assessment.
METHODS: A literature search was performed for all publications describing
surgical treatment, percutaneous needle aponeurotomy or collagenase injection for
primary or recurrent Dupuytren's disease where outcomes had been monitored using 
functional measures.
RESULTS: Ninety-one studies met the inclusion criteria. Twenty-two studies
reported outcomes using patient reported outcome measures (PROMs) ranging from
validated questionnaires to self-reported measures for return to work and
self-rated disability. The Disability of Arm, Shoulder and Hand (DASH) score was 
the most utilised patient-reported function measure (n=11). Patient satisfaction 
was reported by eighteen studies but no single method was used consistently.
Range of movement was the most frequent physical measure and was reported in all 
91 studies. However, the methods of measurement and reporting varied, with
seventeen different techniques being used. Other physical measures included grip 
and pinch strength and sensibility, again with variations in measurement
protocols. The mean follow-up time ranged from 2 weeks to 17 years.
CONCLUSIONS: There is little consistency in the reporting of outcomes for
interventions in patients with Dupuytren's disease, making it impossible to
compare the efficacy of different treatment modalities. Although there are
limitations to the existing generic patient reported outcomes measures, a
combination of these together with a disease-specific questionnaire, and physical
measures of active and passive individual joint Range of movement (ROM), grip and
sensibility using standardised protocols should be used for future outcomes
studies. As Dupuytren's disease tends to recur following treatment as well as
extend to involve other areas of the hand, follow-up times should be standardised
and designed to capture both short and long term outcomes.

DOI: 10.1186/1471-2474-14-131 
PMCID: PMC3637830
PMID: 23575442  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
