

17. Health Technol Assess. 2015 Oct;19(90):1-202. doi: 10.3310/hta19900.

Collagenase clostridium histolyticum for the treatment of Dupuytren's
contracture: systematic review and economic evaluation.

Brazzelli M(1), Cruickshank M(1), Tassie E(2), McNamee P(2), Robertson C(1),
Elders A(1), Fraser C(1), Hernandez R(2), Lawrie D(3), Ramsay C(1).

Author information: 
(1)Health Services Research Unit, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK. (2)Health
Economics Research Unit, University of Aberdeen, Aberdeen, UK. (3)NHS Grampian,
Aberdeen Royal Infirmary, Aberdeen, UK.

BACKGROUND: Dupuytren's disease is a slowly progressive condition of the hand,
characterised by the formation of nodules in the palm that gradually develop into
fibrotic cords. Contracture of the cords produces deformities of the fingers.
Surgery is recommended for moderate and severe contractures, but complications
and/or recurrences are frequent. Collagenase clostridium histolyticum (CCH) has
been developed as a minimally invasive alternative to surgery for some patients.
OBJECTIVES: To assess the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of
collagenase as an alternative to surgery for adults with Dupuytren's contracture 
with a palpable cord.
DATA SOURCES: We searched all major electronic databases from 1990 to February
2014.
REVIEW METHODS: Randomised controlled trials (RCTs), non-randomised comparative
studies and observational studies involving collagenase and/or surgical
interventions were considered. Two reviewers independently extracted data and
assessed risk of bias of included studies. A de novo Markov model was developed
to assess cost-effectiveness of collagenase, percutaneous needle fasciotomy (PNF)
and limited fasciectomy (LF). Results were reported as incremental cost per
quality-adjusted life-year (QALY) gained. Deterministic and probabilistic
sensitivity analyses were undertaken to investigate model and parameter
uncertainty.
RESULTS: Five RCTs comparing collagenase with placebo (493 participants), three
RCTs comparing surgical techniques (334 participants), two non-randomised studies
comparing collagenase and surgery (105 participants), five non-randomised
comparative studies assessing various surgical procedures (3571 participants) and
15 collagenase case series (3154 participants) were included. Meta-analyses of
RCTs assessing CCH versus placebo were performed. Joints randomised to
collagenase were more likely to achieve clinical success. Collagenase-treated
participants experienced significant reduction in contracture and an increased
range of motion compared with placebo-treated participants. Participants treated 
with collagenase also experienced significantly more adverse events, most of
which were mild or moderate. Four serious adverse events were observed in the
collagenase group: two tendon ruptures, one pulley rupture and one complex
regional pain syndrome. Two tendon ruptures were also reported in two collagenase
case series. Non-randomised studies comparing collagenase with surgery produced
variable results and were at high risk of bias. Serious adverse events across
surgery studies were low. Recurrence rates ranged from 0% (at 90 days) to 100%
(at 8 years) for collagenase and from 0% (at 2.7 years for fasciectomy) to 85%
(at 5 years for PNF) for surgery. The results of the de novo economic analysis
show that PNF was the cheapest treatment option, whereas LF generated the
greatest QALY gains. Collagenase was more costly and generated fewer QALYs
compared with LF. LF was £1199 more costly and generated an additional 0.11 QALYs
in comparison with PNF. The incremental cost-effectiveness ratio was £10,871 per 
QALY gained. Two subgroup analyses were conducted for a population of patients
with moderate and severe disease and up to two joints affected. In both subgroup 
analyses, collagenase remained dominated.
LIMITATIONS: The main limitation of the review was the lack of head-to-head RCTs 
comparing collagenase with surgery and the limited evidence base for estimating
the effects of specific surgical procedures (fasciectomy and PNF). Substantial
differences across studies further limited the comparability of available
evidence. The economic model was derived from a naive indirect comparison and was
hindered by a lack of suitable data. In addition, there was considerable
uncertainty about the appropriateness of many assumptions and parameters used in 
the model.
CONCLUSIONS: Collagenase was significantly better than placebo. There was no
evidence that collagenase was clinically better or worse than surgical
treatments. LF was the most cost-effective choice to treat moderate to severe
contractures, whereas collagenase was not. However, the results of the
cost-utility analysis are based on a naive indirect comparison of clinical
effectiveness, and a RCT is required to confirm or refute these findings.
STUDY REGISTRATION: This study is registered as PROSPERO CRD42013006248.
FUNDING: The National Institute for Health Research Health Technology Assessment 
programme.

DOI: 10.3310/hta19900 
PMCID: PMC4781188
PMID: 26524616  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
