

172. J Vis Exp. 2015 Apr 18;(98). doi: 10.3791/52534.

Human Dupuytren's Ex Vivo Culture for the Study of Myofibroblasts and
Extracellular Matrix Interactions.

Karkampouna S(1), Kloen P(2), Obdeijn MC(3), Riester SM(4), van Wijnen AJ(5),
Kruithof-de Julio M(6).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Cancer Genomics Centre and Centre for
Biomedical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center. (2)Department of
Orthopedic Surgery, Academic Medical Center. (3)Department of Plastic,
Reconstructive and Hand Surgery, Academic Medical Center. (4)Department of
Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo Clinic. (5)Department of Orthopedic Surgery, Mayo
Clinic; Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Mayo Clinic.
(6)Department of Molecular Cell Biology, Cancer Genomics Centre and Centre for
Biomedical Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center; Department of Dermatology,
Leiden University Medical Center; m.de_julio@lumc.nl.

Organ fibrosis or "scarring" is known to account for a high death toll due to the
extensive amount of disorders and organs affected (from cirrhosis to
cardiovascular diseases). There is no effective treatment and the in vitro tools 
available do not mimic the in vivo situation rendering the progress of the out of
control wound healing process still enigmatic. To date, 2D and 3D cultures of
fibroblasts derived from DD patients are the main experimental models available. 
Primary cell cultures have many limitations; the fibroblasts derived from DD are 
altered by the culture conditions, lack cellular context and interactions, which 
are crucial for the development of fibrosis and weakly represent the derived
tissue. Real-time PCR analysis of fibroblasts derived from control and DD samples
show that little difference is detectable. 3D cultures of fibroblasts include
addition of extracellular matrix that alters the native conditions of these
cells. As a way to characterize the fibrotic, proliferative properties of these
resection specimens we have developed a 3D culture system, using intact human
resections of the nodule part of the cord. The system is based on transwell
plates with an attached nitrocellulose membrane that allows contact of the tissue
with the medium but not with the plastic, thus, preventing the alteration of the 
tissue. No collagen gel or other extracellular matrix protein substrate is
required. The tissue resection specimens maintain their viability and
proliferative properties for 7 days. This is the first "organ" culture system
that allows human resection specimens from DD patients to be grown ex vivo and
functionally tested, recapitulating the in vivo situation.

DOI: 10.3791/52534 
PMID: 25938583  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
