

179. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 16;9(6):e99967. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099967. eCollection
2014.

First identification of resident and circulating fibrocytes in Dupuytren's
disease shown to be inhibited by serum amyloid P and Xiapex.

Iqbal SA(1), Hayton MJ(2), Watson JS(3), Szczypa P(4), Bayat A(5).

Author information: 
(1)Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery Research, Manchester Institute of
Biotechnology, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom.
(2)Department of Hand and Upper Limb Surgery, Wrightington Hospital,
Wrightington, United Kingdom. (3)Department of Plastic and Reconstructive
Surgery, University Hospital South Manchester NHS Foundation Trust, Wythenshawe
Hospital, Manchester, United Kingdom. (4)Medical Affairs Pfizer Ltd, Tadworth,
Surrey, United Kingdom. (5)Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery Research, Manchester 
Institute of Biotechnology, University of Manchester, Manchester, United Kingdom;
Department of Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, University Hospital South
Manchester NHS Foundation Trust, Wythenshawe Hospital, Manchester, United
Kingdom.

Dupuytren's disease (DD) is a common progressive fibroproliferative disorder
causing permanent digital contracture. Proliferative myofibroblasts are thought
to be the cells responsible for DD initiation and recurrence, although their
source remains unknown. DD tissue has also been shown to harbor mesenchymal and
hematopoietic stem cells. Fibrocytes are circulating cells that show
characteristics of fibroblasts and they express surface markers for both
hematopoietic and mesenchymal stromal cells. Fibrocytes differentiate from
peripheral CD14+ mononuclear cells, which can be inhibited by serum amyloid P
(SAP). In this study we have demonstrated the presence of fibrocytes in DD blood 
and tissue, moreover we have evaluated the effects of SAP and Xiapex (Collagenase
Clostridium histolyticum) on fibrocytes derived from DD. H&E staining showed
typical Spindle shaped morphology of fibrocytes. FACS analysis based on a unique 
combination of 3 markers, revealed the increased presence of fibrocytes in blood 
and tissue of DD patients. Additionally, immunohistology of DD nodule and cord
tissue showed the presence of collagen 1+/CD34+ cells. No difference in plasma
SAP levels was observed between DD and control. Higher concentrations of SAP
significantly inhibited fibrocytes differentiated from DD derived monocytes
compared to control. DD fascia derived fibrocytes showed resistance to growth
inhibition by SAP, particularly nodule derived fibrocytes showed robust growth
even at higher SAP concentrations compared to control. DD derived fibrocytes were
positive for typical fibrocyte dual markers, i.e. Collagen 1/LSP-1 and collagen
1/CD34. Xiapex was more effective in inhibiting the growth of nodule derived
cells compared to commercially available collagenase A. Our results show for the 
first time the increased presence of fibrocytes in DD patient's blood and disease
tissue compared to control tissue. Additionally, we evaluate the response of
these fibrocytes to SAP and Xiapex therapy.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0099967 
PMCID: PMC4059720
PMID: 24933153  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
