

180. Transl Res. 2015 Dec;166(6):762-771.e3. doi: 10.1016/j.trsl.2015.09.006. Epub
2015 Sep 25.

Wnt pathway in Dupuytren disease: connecting profibrotic signals.

van Beuge MM(1), Ten Dam EJ(2), Werker PM(3), Bank RA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Medical Biology, University Medical Center
Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. Electronic
address: m.m.van.beuge@umcg.nl. (2)Department of Pathology and Medical Biology,
University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands; Department of Plastic Surgery, University Medical Center Groningen, 
Groningen, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Plastic Surgery, University Medical 
Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (4)Department of Pathology and
Medical Biology, University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen,
Groningen, The Netherlands.

A role of Wnt signaling in Dupuytren disease, a fibroproliferative disease of the
hand and fingers, has not been fully elucidated. We examined a large set of Wnt
pathway components and signaling targets and found significant dysregulation of
41 Wnt-related genes in tissue from the Dupuytren nodules compared with
patient-matched control tissue. A large proportion of genes coding for Wnt
proteins themselves was downregulated. However, both canonical Wnt targets and
components of the noncanonical signaling pathway were upregulated.
Immunohistochemical analysis revealed that protein expression of Wnt1-inducible
secreted protein 1 (WISP1), a known Wnt target, was increased in nodules compared
with control tissue, but knockdown of WISP1 using small interfering RNA (siRNA)
in the Dupuytren myofibroblasts did not confirm a functional role. The protein
expression of noncanonical pathway components Wnt5A and VANGL2 as well as
noncanonical coreceptors Ror2 and Ryk was increased in nodules. On the contrary, 
the strongest downregulated genes in this study were 4 antagonists of Wnt
signaling (DKK1, FRZB, SFRP1, and WIF1). Downregulation of these genes in the
Dupuytren tissue was mimicked in vitro by treating normal fibroblasts with
transforming growth factor β1 (TGF-β1), suggesting cross talk between different
profibrotic pathways. Furthermore, siRNA-mediated knockdown of these antagonists 
in normal fibroblasts led to increased nuclear translocation of Wnt target
β-catenin in response to TGF-β1 treatment. In conclusion, we have shown extensive
dysregulation of Wnt signaling in affected tissue from Dupuytren disease
patients. Components of both the canonical and the noncanonical pathways are
upregulated, whereas endogenous antagonists are downregulated, possibly via
interaction with other profibrotic pathways.

Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.trsl.2015.09.006 
PMID: 26470681  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
