

186. PLoS One. 2012;7(2):e31430. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031430. Epub 2012 Feb 24.

In vitro study of novel collagenase (XIAFLEX®) on Dupuytren's disease fibroblasts
displays unique drug related properties.

Syed F(1), Thomas AN, Singh S, Kolluru V, Emeigh Hart SG, Bayat A.

Author information: 
(1)Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery Research, School of Translational Medicine,
Manchester Interdisciplinary Biocentre, University of Manchester, Manchester,
United Kingdom.

Dupuytren's disease (DD) is a benign, fibroproliferative disease of the palmar
fascia, with excessive extracellular matrix (ECM) deposition and over-production 
of cytokines and growth factors, resulting in digital fixed flexion contractures 
limiting hand function and patient quality of life. Surgical fasciectomy is the
gold standard treatment but is invasive and has associated morbidity without
limiting disease recurrence. Injectable Collagenase Clostridium histolyticum
(CCH)--Xiaflex®--is a novel, nonsurgical option with clinically proven in vivo
reduction of DD contractures but with limited in vitro data demonstrating its
cellular and molecular effects. The aim of this study was to delineate the
effects of CCH on primary fibroblasts isolated from DD and non-DD anatomical
sites (using RTCA, LDH, WST-1, FACS, qRT-PCR, ELISA and In-Cell Quantitative
Western Blotting) to compare the efficacy of varying concentrations of Xiaflex®
against a reagent grade Collagenase, Collagenase A. Results demonstrated that DD 
nodule and cord fibroblasts had greater proliferation than those from fat and
skin. Xiaflex® exposure resulted in dose- and time-dependent inhibition of
cellular spreading, attachment and proliferation, with cellular recovery after
enzyme removal. Unlike Collagenase A, Xiaflex® did not cause apoptosis. Collagen 
expression patterns were significantly (p<0.05) different in DD fibroblasts
across anatomical sites - the highest levels of collagen I and III were detected 
in DD nodule, with DD cord and fat fibroblasts demonstrating a smaller increase
in both collagen expression relative to DD skin. Xiaflex® significantly (p<0.05) 
down-regulated ECM components, cytokines and growth factors in a dose-dependent
manner. An in vitro scratch wound assay model demonstrated that, at low
concentrations, Xiaflex® enabled a faster fibroblast reparatory migration into
the wound, whereas, at high concentrations, this process was significantly
(p<0.05) inhibited. This is the first report elucidating potential mechanisms of 
action of Xiaflex® on Dupuytren fibroblasts, offering a greater insight and a
better understanding of its effect in DD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0031430 
PMCID: PMC3286458
PMID: 22384021  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
