

187. Med Hypotheses. 2012 Mar;78(3):385-8. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2011.11.023. Epub 2011 
Dec 23.

Concurrent inhibition of TGF-β and mitogen driven signaling cascades in
Dupuytren's disease - non-surgical treatment strategies from a signaling point of
view.

Krause C(1), Kloen P.

Author information: 
(1)Institute for Chemistry and Biochemistry, Free University of Berlin, Berlin,
Germany. carola.krause@fu-berlin.de

Dupuytren's disease (DD) is a benign progressive fibro-proliferative disorder of 
the fascia palmaris of the hand. Currently, treatment consists of surgical
excision with a relatively high recurrence rate and risk of complications. To
improve long-term outcome of DD treatment, research focus has shifted towards
molecular targets for DD as an alternative to surgery. Therefore, complete and
exact understanding of the cause of DD is needed. Transforming growth factor
(TGF)-β is considered a key player in DD. We recently showed that increased TGF-β
expression in DD correlates not only with elevated expression and activation of
downstream Smad effectors, but also with overactive ERK1/2 MAP kinase signaling. 
Both TGF-β/Smad and non-Smad signaling pathways increase expression of key
fibrotic markers and contractility of Dupuytren's myofibroblasts. What is not yet
known is whether these two signaling cascades each accelerate DD autonomously,
successively or in conjunction. Elucidation of this mechanism will help develop
new potential non-surgical treatments. We hypothesize that TGF-β-induced
short-term activation of the MAPK pathway leads to an autonomous non-Smad driven 
fibrosis. Therefore, successful treatment strategies will target not only
TGF-β/Smad, but also intracellular MAPK signaling. In this review we discuss
possible scenarios in which such a drift from TGF-β induced Smad signaling to
autonomous non-Smad signaling could be observed in DD. The potential therapeutic 
effects of small cytokine signaling cascades inhibitors, such as TGF-β type I
receptor-, (pan-) tyrosine- or ERK1/2 MAP-kinase inhibitor will be highlighted.
To abrogate the fibrotic trait and the recurrence of DD, we speculate on
sequential and co-application of such molecules in order to provide possible new 
non-operative strategies for DD.

Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2011.11.023 
PMID: 22196988  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
