

190. J Hand Surg Am. 2013 Dec;38(12):2365-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2013.08.122. Epub
2013 Oct 17.

Response of dupuytren fibroblasts to different oxygen environments.

Türker T(1), Murphy E, Kaufman CL, Kutz JE, Meister EA, Hoying JB.

Author information: 
(1)Christine M. Kleinert Institute for Hand and Microsurgery; the University of
Louisville School of Medicine; the Kleinert Kutz Hand Surgery Group; and the
Division of Cardiovascular Therapeutics, Cardiovascular Innovation Institute,
University of Louisville and Jewish Hospital/St. Mary's Healthcare, Louisville,
KY; and the Department of Surgery, Division of Reconstructive and Plastic
Surgery, Hand, Upper Extremity, and Microsurgery; and the Department of Medicine,
Division of Transplantation, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ. Electronic
address: drtolgaturker@gmail.com.

PURPOSE: It is thought that local ischemia and oxygen radicals are responsible
for fibroblast-to-myofibroblast cell transformation and proliferation. We
hypothesized that hypoxia could differentially activate the contractility of
fibroblasts from normal human palmar fascia and from fibroblasts-myofibroblasts
of Dupuytren cords.
METHODS: Normal palmar fascia from 5 patients with carpal tunnel syndrome and
Dupuytren cords from 5 patients were harvested. Cells were cultured from all
tissue samples, and collagen lattices were prepared containing these cells.
Oxygen treatment subgroups were created and incubated under hypoxic (1% O(2), 5% 
CO(2), and 94% N(2)), normoxic (21% O(2), 5% CO(2), and 74% N(2)), and hyperoxic 
(100% oxygen using 2.4 atm pressure twice a day for 7 d) conditions. After 7
days, each subgroup was photographed, and lattices were released from dishes.
Postrelease photographs were taken immediately, 5 minutes after release, and
after 1 hour. Areas of the lattices at each time point were calculated using
MetaMorph software. Actin staining and live/dead cell analysis was performed.
Linear repeated measures analysis of variance was used for data analysis given
that contraction levels were measured over 3 distinct time points.
RESULTS: We found a statistically significant difference between normal samples
and Dupuytren samples in mean contraction levels over time. There was no
statistically significant difference between tissue groups over the 3 time
periods based on the oxygen treatment received.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results showed a greater degree of contractility in Dupuytren
disease cells than normal fibroblasts. However, the contraction in either group
was not affected by oxygen level. Future in vivo research is needed to better
understand the nature of pathophysiology of Dupuytren disease.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Surgery of the Hand. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2013.08.122 
PMID: 24140364  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
