

193. Phys Ther. 2015 May;95(5):750-7. doi: 10.2522/ptj.20130590. Epub 2014 Dec 18.

Construct validity of the canadian occupational performance measure in
participants with tendon injury and Dupuytren disease.

van de Ven-Stevens LA(1), Graff MJ(2), Peters MA(3), van der Linde H(4), Geurts
AC(5).

Author information: 
(1)L.A.W. van de Ven-Stevens, MSc, OT, CHT-NL, Department of Rehabilitation, 898,
Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Radboud University Medical Centre, PO Box 
9101, 6500 HB Nijmegen, the Netherlands. L.vandeVen-Stevens@home.nl. (2)M.J.L.
Graff, PhD, OT, Department of Rehabilitation, Radboud Institute for Health
Sciences, Radboud University Medical Centre. (3)M.A.M. Peters, MSc, Department of
Rehabilitation, Radboud Institute for Health Sciences, Radboud University Medical
Centre. (4)H. van der Linde, PhD, MD, Department of Rehabilitation, Radboud
Institute for Health Sciences, Radboud University Medical Centre. (5)A.C.H.
Geurts, PhD, MD, Department of Rehabilitation, Radboud Institute for Health
Sciences, Radboud University Medical Centre.

BACKGROUND: In patient-centered practice, instruments need to assess outcomes
that are meaningful to patients with hand conditions. It is unclear which
assessment tools address these subjective perspectives best.
OBJECTIVE: The aim of this study was to establish the construct validity of the
Canadian Occupational Performance Measure (COPM) in relation to the Disabilities 
of Arm, Shoulder, and Hand (DASH) questionnaire and the Michigan Hand Outcomes
Questionnaire (MHQ) in people with hand conditions. It was hypothesized that COPM
scores would correlate with DASH and MHQ total scores only to a moderate degree
and that the COPM, DASH questionnaire, and MHQ would all correlate weakly with
measures of hand impairments.
DESIGN: This was a validation study.
METHODS: The COPM, DASH questionnaire, and MHQ were scored, and then hand
impairments were measured (pain [numerical rating scale], active range of motion 
[goniometer], grip strength [dynamometer], and pinch grip strength [pinch
meter]). People who had received postsurgery rehabilitation for flexor tendon
injuries, extensor tendon injuries, or Dupuytren disease were eligible.
RESULTS: Seventy-two participants were included. For all diagnosis groups, the
Pearson coefficient of correlation between the DASH questionnaire and the MHQ was
higher than .60, whereas the correlation between the performance scale of the
COPM and either the DASH questionnaire or the MHQ was lower than .51.
Correlations of these assessment tools with measures of hand impairments were
lower than .46.
LIMITATIONS: The small sample sizes may limit the generalization of the results.
CONCLUSIONS: The results supported the hypotheses and, thus, the construct
validity of the COPM after surgery in people with hand conditions.

© 2015 American Physical Therapy Association.

DOI: 10.2522/ptj.20130590 
PMID: 25524872  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
