

197. PLoS One. 2013;8(3):e59056. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059056. Epub 2013 Mar 12.

Genome-wide analysis using exon arrays demonstrates an important role for
expression of extra-cellular matrix, fibrotic control and tissue remodelling
genes in Dupuytren's disease.

Forrester HB(1), Temple-Smith P, Ham S, de Kretser D, Southwick G, Sprung CN.

Author information: 
(1)Centre for Innate Immunology and Infectious Disease, Monash Institute of
Medical Research, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.

Dupuytren's disease (DD) is a classic example of pathological fibrosis which
results in a debilitating disorder affecting a large sector of the human
population. It is characterized by excessive local proliferation of fibroblasts
and over-production of collagen and other components of extracellular matrix
(ECM) in the palmar fascia. The fibrosis progressively results in contracture of 
elements between the palmar fascia and skin causing flexion deformity or clawing 
of the fingers and a severe reduction in hand function. While much is known about
the pathogenesis and surgical treatment of DD, little is known about the factors 
that cause its onset and progression, despite many years of research. Gene
expression patterns in DD patients now offers the potential to identify genes
that direct the pathogenesis of DD. In this study we used primary cultures of
fibroblasts derived from excisional biopsies of fibrotic tissue from DD patients 
to compare the gene expression profiles on a genome-wide basis with normal
control fibroblasts. Our investigations have identified genes that may be
involved with DD pathogenesis including some which are directly relevant to
fibrosis. In particular, these include significantly reduced expression levels of
three matrix metallopeptidases (MMP1, MMP3, MMP16), follistatin, and STAT1, and
significantly increased expression levels of fibroblast growth factors (FGF9,
FGF11), a number of collagen genes and other ECM genes in DD patient samples.
Many of these gene products are known to be involved in fibrosis, tumour
formation and in the normal processes of tissue remodelling. In addition,
alternative splicing was identified in some DD associated genes. These highly
sensitive genomic investigations provide new insight into the molecular
mechanisms that may underpin the development and progression of DD.

DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0059056 
PMCID: PMC3595223
PMID: 23554969  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
