

203. Mol Biosyst. 2012 Sep;8(9):2274-88. Epub 2012 Jul 6.

Dupuytren's disease metabolite analyses reveals alterations following initial
short-term fibroblast culturing.

Rehman S(1), Xu Y, Dunn WB, Day PJ, Westerhoff HV, Goodacre R, Bayat A.

Author information: 
(1)Doctoral Training Centre ISBML, The Manchester Centre for Integrative Systems 
Biology, Manchester Institute of Biotechnology, University of Manchester,
Manchester, M1 7DN, UK. Samrina.Rehman@manchester.ac.uk

Dupuytren's disease (DD) is an ill-defined fibroproliferative disorder affecting 
the palm of the hand, resulting in progressive and irreversible digital
contracture. In view of the abnormal gene dysregulation found in DD, and its
potential effect on metabolites at a functional level, we chose to examine the
metabolic profile involved in DD. Using Fourier transform infrared (FT-IR)
spectroscopy to generate metabolic fingerprints of cultured cells, we compared
the profiles of DD cords and nodules (1) against the unaffected transverse palmar
fascia (internal control), (2) against carpal ligamentous fascia (external
control), and (3) against fibroblasts from fat surrounding the nodule and skin
overlying the nodule (environmental control). We also determined the effects of
serial passaging of the cells on DD fingerprints. Subsequently, gas
chromatography-mass spectrometry (GC-MS) was employed for metabolic profiling in 
order to identify metabolites characteristic of the DD tissue phenotypes. We
developed a robust metabolomic analysis procedure of DD using cultured
fibroblasts derived from DD tissues. Our carefully controlled culture conditions,
combined with assessment of metabolic phenotypes by FT-IR and GC-MS, enabled us
to demonstrate metabolic differences between DD and unaffected transverse palmar 
fascia and between DD and healthy control tissue. In early passage (0-3) the
metabolic differences were clear, but cells from subsequent passages (4-6)
started to lose this distinction between diseased and non-diseased origin. The
dysregulated metabolites we identified were leucine, phenylalanine, lysine,
cysteine, aspartic acid, glycerol-3-phosphate and the vitamin precursor to
coenzyme A. Early passage DD cells exhibit a clear metabolic profile, in which
central metabolic pathways appear to be involved. Experimental conditions have
been identified in which these DD data are reproducible. The experimental
reproducibility will be useful in DD diagnostics and for DD systems biology.

DOI: 10.1039/c2mb25173f 
PMID: 22772395  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
