

206. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2013 Dec;132(6):964e-76e. doi:
10.1097/01.prs.0000434410.40217.23.

Dupuytren disease: European hand surgeons, hand therapists, and physical medicine
and rehabilitation physicians agree on a multidisciplinary treatment guideline:
results from the HANDGUIDE study.

Huisstede BM(1), Hoogvliet P, Coert JH, Fridén J; European HANDGUIDE Group.

Collaborators: Antonio L, Arandes J, Calcagni M, Degreef I, Forsman M, Jung M,
Larson S, Levadoux M, van Loon J, Mackenney E, Mathoulin C, Odinsson A, Schuurman
A, Watson S, Weis T, Wilbrand S, Aglen T, Berkhout T, Boel S, Clift Z, Cotroneo
C, Flodmark C, Hilmand B, Le Lardic C, Larson D, De Luca E, Lurie T, Marincek M, 
Mayor C, Mee S, Neving M, Petelet M, Puggaard H, Vergouwen L, Videler A, Duruoz
T, Felc A, Gonçalves L, van der Sluis C.

Author information: 
(1)Rotterdam, The Netherlands; and Gothenburg, Sweden From the Department of
Rehabilitation Medicine and Physical Therapy and the Department of Plastic and
Reconstructive Surgery and Hand Surgery, Erasmus MC-University Medical Center
Rotterdam; the Department of Hand Surgery, Sahlgrenska University Hospital; and
the Institute of Clinical Sciences, Sahlgrenska Academy, University of
Gothenburg.

BACKGROUND: Multidisciplinary treatment guidelines for Dupuytren disease can aid 
in optimizing the quality of care for patients with this disorder. Therefore,
this study aimed to achieve consensus on a multidisciplinary treatment guideline 
for Dupuytren disease.
METHODS: A European Delphi consensus strategy was initiated. A systematic review 
reporting on the effectiveness of interventions was conducted and used as an
evidence-based starting point for this study. In total, 39 experts (hand
surgeons, hand therapists, and physical medicine and rehabilitation physicians)
participated in the Delphi consensus strategy. Each Delphi round consisted of a
questionnaire, an analysis, and a feedback report.
RESULTS: After four Delphi rounds, consensus was achieved on the description,
symptoms, and diagnosis of Dupuytren disease. No nonsurgical interventions were
included in the guideline. Needle and open fasciotomy, and a limited fasciectomy 
and dermofasciectomy, were seen as suitable surgical techniques for Dupuytren
disease. Factors relevant for choosing one of these surgical techniques were
identified and divided into patient-related (age, comorbidity), disease-related
(palpable cord, previous surgery in the same area, skin involvement, time of
recovery, recurrences), and surgeon-related (years of experience) factors.
Associations of these factors with the choice of a specific surgical technique
were reported in the guideline. Postsurgical rehabilitation should always include
instructions and exercise therapy; postsurgical splinting should be performed on 
indication. Relevant details for the use of surgical and postsurgical
interventions were described.
CONCLUSION: This treatment guideline is likely to promote further discussion on
related clinical and scientific issues and may therefore contribute to better
treatment of patients with Dupuytren disease.

DOI: 10.1097/01.prs.0000434410.40217.23 
PMID: 24281643  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
