

212. J Hand Surg Am. 2013 Jan;38(1):23-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2012.09.013. Epub 2012
Dec 4.

Ultrasonographic evaluation of displaced neurovascular bundle in Dupuytren
disease.

Uehara K(1), Miura T, Morizaki Y, Miyamoto H, Ohe T, Tanaka S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, Graduate School of Medicine, The University
of Tokyo, Tokyo, Japan.

PURPOSE: Neurovascular injury is a serious complication after surgery for
Dupuytren disease. The purpose of this study was to evaluate the relationship
between the cord and the neurovascular bundle ultrasonographically.
METHODS: We included 22 healthy volunteers and 14 Dupuytren disease patients (25 
fingers) in this study. We evaluated the cord and the digital artery with
high-resolution ultrasound. We first investigated the effect of the angle of
metacarpophalangeal joint on the position of the radial and ulnar digital
arteries in volunteers without evidence of Dupuytren disease. We compared 3
parameters of the radial and ulnar digital arteries, including differences in
depth, differences in lateral shift, and the shape of the cross-section of the
artery, between volunteers and patients with Dupuytren disease.
RESULTS: None of these parameters changed with flexion of the metacarpophalangeal
joint of 0°, 30°, and 60°. Digital arteries and cords could be identified
ultrasonographically in all patients, and we confirmed ultrasonographic findings 
by operative findings in 13 fingers. We classified the fingers into 3 subgroups
based on the ultrasonographic findings: type A (n = 13), in which the cord was
above the artery; type B (n = 5), in which the cord was below the artery; and
type C (n = 7), in which the cord was located between the radial and ulnar
digital arteries. Types A, B, and C corresponded to natatory cord/abductor digiti
minimi cord, spiral cord, and central cord, respectively. Comparisons among
volunteers and patient subgroups showed that the difference in depth in type B
patients was significantly larger than that of the other groups. When we set the 
cutoff point of the difference in depth to 3 mm, sensitivity and specificity to
detect the spiral cord were 80% and 76%, respectively.
CONCLUSIONS: The relationship between the neurovascular bundle and the type of
Dupuytren disease cord can be evaluated by high-resolution ultrasound.
TYPE OF STUDY/LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Diagnostic III.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Surgery of the Hand. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2012.09.013 
PMID: 23218555  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
