

223. J Res Health Sci. 2014 Winter;14(1):92-5.

Prevalence and risk factors of five most common upper extremity disorders in
diabetics.

Kiani J(1), Goharifar H(2), Moghimbeigi A(3), Azizkhani H(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Hamadan University of
Medical Sciences, Hamadan, Iran. javadkeyani@yahoo.com. (2)Division of
Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, School of Medicine, Hamadan
University of Medical Sciences, Hamadan, Iran. (3)Modeling of Noncommunicable
Disease Research Center, Department of Biostatistics and Epidemiology, School of 
Public Health, Hamadan University of Medical Sciences, Hamadan, Iran. (4)School
of Medicine, Hamadan University of Medical Sciences, Hamadan, Iran.

BACKGROUND: In addition to macrovascular and along with other microvascular
complications, diabetic patients suffer from some common musculoskeletal
complications. The aim of this study was to assess the prevalence of five
musculoskeletal disorders of upper extremity including shoulder capsulitis (SC), 
limited joint mobility (LJM), Dupuytren's contracture (DC), carpal tunnel
syndrome (CTS), and trigger finger (TF) as well as identify their related risk
factors in diabetic patients.
METHODS: We recruited 432 types 1 or 2 diabetic patients and evaluated them for
the presence of musculoskeletal disorders and their-related risk factors in
2012-13. The patients were examined by an endocrinologist and then suspected
subjects evaluated by a rheumatologist for defining final diagnosis.
RESULTS: The most prevalent musculoskeletal disorder of upper extremity was SC
(8.79%), followed by CTS (8.56%), LJM (6.94%), DC (7.4%), and TF (6.71%).
Advanced age, female sex, smoking, and duration of diabetes were associated with 
the appearance of SC; female sex and duration of diabetes with CTS; advanced age 
and smoking with LJM; advanced age, duration of diabetes and history of foot
ulcer with DC; and history of laser photocoagulation was associated with TF.
CONCLUSIONS: The results show lower prevalence of upper musculoskeletal disorders
and different associated risk factors in our diabetic population in comparison
with previous studies on other populations.


PMID: 24402858  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
