

250. J Hand Surg Am. 2012 Oct;37(10):2106-11. doi: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2012.07.017.

Dupuytren diathesis and genetic risk.

Dolmans GH(1), de Bock GH, Werker PM.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic Surgery, University Medical Center Groningen, University
of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. g.h.c.g.dolmans@plchir.umcg.nl

PURPOSE: Dupuytren disease (DD) is a benign fibrosing disorder of the hand and
fingers. Recently, we identified 9 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs)
associated with DD in a genome-wide association study. These SNPs can be used to 
calculate a genetic risk score for DD. The aim of this study was to test whether 
certain clinical characteristics (including the DD diathesis features) of
patients with DD are associated with a high genetic risk score.
METHODS: Between 2007 and 2010, we prospectively invited all DD patients (1,120
in total) to participate. Clinical characteristics were noted using patient- and 
doctor-completed questionnaires, and blood was obtained for DNA analysis. We
analyzed a total of 933 subjects with genetic and clinical data. The 9 previously
identified DD SNPs were used to calculate a weighted genetic risk score. Patients
were categorized into high and low genetic risk score groups, according to their 
weighted genetic risk score. Logistic regression was performed to study the
association of clinical characteristics with a high genetic risk score.
RESULTS: In a univariate regression model, patients with an age of onset of DD
younger than 50 years, a family history positive for DD, knuckle pads, and
Ledderhose disease were statistically significantly associated with a high
genetic risk score. In an additional analysis using high and low genetic risk
groups that deviate further from the median, Ledderhose disease was no longer
significantly associated with DD.
CONCLUSIONS: Patients with DD who present with these diathesis features, and
predominantly patients with knuckle pads, are more likely to carry more risk
alleles for the discovered DD SNPs than patients without these diathesis
features.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: These markers may prove useful in predicting disease
progression or recurrence.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Surgery of the Hand. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2012.07.017 
PMID: 23021175  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
