

254. Am J Pathol. 2015 Dec;185(12):3326-37. doi: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2015.08.011. Epub
2015 Oct 10.

YAP1 Is a Driver of Myofibroblast Differentiation in Normal and Diseased
Fibroblasts.

Piersma B(1), de Rond S(1), Werker PM(2), Boo S(3), Hinz B(3), van Beuge MM(1),
Bank RA(4).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Pathology and Medical Biology, University of Groningen,
University Medical Center Groningen, Matrix Research Group, Groningen, The
Netherlands. (2)Department of Plastic Surgery, University of Groningen,
University Medical Center Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. (3)Laboratory of
Tissue Repair and Regeneration, Matrix Dynamics Group, Faculty of Dentistry,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario, Canada. (4)Department of Pathology and
Medical Biology, University of Groningen, University Medical Center Groningen,
Matrix Research Group, Groningen, The Netherlands. Electronic address:
r.a.bank@umcg.nl.

Dupuytren disease is a fibrotic disorder characterized by contraction of
myofibroblast-rich cords and nodules in the hands. The Hippo member
Yes-associated protein 1 (YAP1) is activated by tissue stiffness and the
profibrotic transforming growth factor-β1, but its role in cell fibrogenesis is
yet unclear. We hypothesized that YAP1 regulates the differentiation of dermal
fibroblasts into highly contractile myofibroblasts and that YAP1 governs the
maintenance of a myofibroblast phenotype in primary Dupuytren cells. Knockdown of
YAP1 in transforming growth factor-β1-stimulated dermal fibroblasts decreased the
formation of contractile smooth muscle α-actin stress fibers and the deposition
of collagen type I, which are hallmark features of myofibroblasts. Translating
our findings to a clinically relevant model, we found that YAP1 deficiency in
Dupuytren disease myofibroblasts resulted in decreased expression of ACTA2,
COL1A1, and CCN2 mRNA, but this did not result in decreased protein levels.
YAP1-deficient Dupuytren myofibroblasts showed decreased contraction of a
collagen hydrogel. Finally, we showed that YAP1 levels and nuclear localization
were elevated in affected Dupuytren disease tissue compared with matched control 
tissue and partly co-localized with smooth muscle α-actin-positive cells. In
conclusion, our data show that YAP1 is a regulator of myofibroblast
differentiation and contributes to the maintenance of a synthetic and contractile
phenotype, in both transforming growth factor-β1-induced myofibroblast
differentiation and primary Dupuytren myofibroblasts.

Copyright © 2015 American Society for Investigative Pathology. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ajpath.2015.08.011 
PMID: 26458763  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
