

256. J Hand Surg Am. 2016 Mar;41(3):354-61; quiz 361. doi: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2015.10.027.
Epub 2016 Jan 16.

Clusters in Short-term Disease Course in Participants With Primary Dupuytren
Disease.

Lanting R(1), van den Heuvel ER(2), Werker PM(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic Surgery, University Medical Center Groningen, University
of Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands. Electronic address: r.lanting@umcg.nl. 
(2)Department of Mathematics and Computer Science, Eindhoven University of
Technology, Eindhoven, The Netherlands. (3)Department of Plastic Surgery,
University Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, Groningen, The
Netherlands.

PURPOSE: The course of Dupuytren disease (DD) is thought to be progressive;
however, the course differs for each patient. The purpose of this study was to
study the rate and pattern of progression of DD.
METHODS: We prospectively analyzed the course of DD at intervals of 3 to 6 months
in 247 Dutch participants with primary DD by measuring the surface area of
nodules and cords and the total passive extension deficit. The association
between surface area and Tubiana stage was tested with generalized estimating
equations. Latent class models were used to study different clusters in changes
regarding the course of the disease.
RESULTS: The variance in disease course between participants was large. Regarding
the change in surface area (in all fingers) and total passive extension deficit
(in the ring and little finger), different clusters were observed. Progression of
disease was seen but there were also signs of stability and even regression.
Patients with a smaller surface area at baseline were more likely to exhibit
regression.
CONCLUSIONS: This study showed that DD is not always progressive and that up to
75% of patients have a different short-term disease course, such as stability or 
even regression of disease. This should be taken into account when evaluating the
effects of treatment for early-phase DD and in the design of future studies.
Furthermore, this information may be useful when counseling patients.
TYPE OF STUDY/LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Prognostic II.

Copyright © 2016 American Society for Surgery of the Hand. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2015.10.027 
PMID: 26787409  [PubMed - in process]
