

293. Connect Tissue Res. 2012;53(3):187-96. doi: 10.3109/03008207.2011.642035. Epub
2012 Feb 13.

Fibroproliferative disorders and their mechanobiology.

Huang C(1), Ogawa R.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Plastic, Reconstructive and Aesthetic Surgery, Nippon Medical
School, Tokyo, Japan.

Benign and malignant fibroproliferative disorders (FPDs) include idiopathic
pulmonary fibrosis, hepatic cirrhosis, myelofibrosis, systemic sclerosis,
Dupuytren's contracture, hypertrophic scars, and keloids. They are characterized 
by excessive connective tissue accumulation and slow but continuous tissue
contraction that lead to progressive deterioration in the normal structure and
function of affected organs. In recent years, research in diverse fields has
increasingly highlighted the potential role of mechanobiology in the molecular
mechanisms of fibroproliferation. Mechanobiology, the heart of which is
mechanotransduction, is the process whereby cells sense mechanical forces and
transduce them, thereby changing the intracellular biochemistry and gene
expression. Understanding mechanosignaling may provide new insights into the
convergent roles played by interrelated molecules and overlapping signaling
pathways during the inflammatory, proliferative, and fibrotic cellular activities
that are the hallmarks of fibroproliferation. The main cellular players in FPDs
are fibroblasts and myofibroblasts. Consequently, this article discusses
integrins and the roles they play in cellular-extracellular matrix interactions. 
Also described are the signaling pathways that are known to participate in
mechanosignaling: these include the transforming growth factor-β/Smad,
mitogen-activated protein kinase, RhoA/ROCK, Wnt/β-catenin, and tumor necrosis
factor-α/nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells pathways.
Also outlined is the progress in our understanding of the cellular-extracellular 
matrix interactions that are associated with fibroproliferative mechanosignaling 
through matricellular proteins. The tensegrity and tensional homeostasis models
are also discussed. A better understanding of the mechanosignaling pathways in
the FPD microenvironment will almost certainly lead to the development of novel
interventions that can prevent, reduce, or even reverse FPD formation and/or
progression.

DOI: 10.3109/03008207.2011.642035 
PMID: 22329637  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
