

300. BioDrugs. 2015 Feb;29(1):31-55. doi: 10.1007/s40259-015-0116-7.

Enzymes approved for human therapy: indications, mechanisms and adverse effects.

Baldo BA(1).

Author information: 
(1), 11 Bent Street, Lindfield, NSW, 2070, Australia, babaldo@iinet.net.au.

Research and drug developments fostered under orphan drug product development
programs have greatly assisted the introduction of efficient and safe
enzyme-based therapies for a range of rare disorders. The introduction and
regulatory approval of 20 different recombinant enzymes has enabled, often for
the first time, effective enzyme-replacement therapy for some lysosomal storage
disorders, including Gaucher (imiglucerase, taliglucerase, and velaglucerase),
Fabry (agalsidase alfa and beta), and Pompe (alglucosidase alfa) diseases and
mucopolysaccharidoses I (laronidase), II (idursulfase), IVA (elosulfase), and VI 
(galsulfase). Approved recombinant enzymes are also now used as therapy for
myocardial infarction (alteplase, reteplase, and tenecteplase), cystic fibrosis
(dornase alfa), chronic gout (pegloticase), tumor lysis syndrome (rasburicase),
leukemia (L-asparaginase), some collagen-based disorders such as Dupuytren's
contracture (collagenase), severe combined immunodeficiency disease (pegademase
bovine), detoxification of methotrexate (glucarpidase), and vitreomacular
adhesion (ocriplasmin). The development of these efficacious and safe
enzyme-based therapies has occurred hand in hand with some remarkable advances in
the preparation of the often specifically designed recombinant enzymes; the
manufacturing expertise necessary for commercial production; our understanding of
underlying mechanisms operative in the different diseases; and the mechanisms of 
action of the relevant recombinant enzymes. Together with information on these
mechanisms, safety findings recorded so far on the various adverse events and
problems of immunogenicity of the recombinant enzymes used for therapy are
presented.

DOI: 10.1007/s40259-015-0116-7 
PMID: 25648140  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
