

301. JBI Database System Rev Implement Rep. 2015 Jan;13(1):27-38. doi:
10.11124/jbisrir-2015-1768.

Effectiveness of ondansetron as an adjunct to lidocaine intravenous regional
anesthesia on tourniquet pain and postoperative pain in patients undergoing
elective hand surgery: a systematic review protocol.

Badeaux J(1), Bonanno L, Au H.

Author information: 
(1)1 The Louisiana Center for Evidence-Based Nursing at LSUHSC School of Nursing:
an Affiliate Center of the Joanna Briggs Institute.

REVIEW QUESTION/OBJECTIVE: The objective of this quantitative systematic review
is to determine the effects of ondansetron as an adjunct to lidocaine on the
tourniquet pain and postoperative pain of American Society of Anesthesiologists
(ASA) class 1 or 2 adult patients undergoing elective hand surgery with
intravenous regional anesthesia.
BACKGROUND: Both injury and deformity of the upper extremity can result in
dysfunction to nerves, tendons and bones which can lead to disability and pain.
Hand injuries and deformities encompass an area of upper extremity surgery,
wherein isolation and accessibility to peripheral nerves allows for a wide range 
of anesthesia techniques. Common hand surgeries include carpal tunnel or trigger 
finger release, Dupuytren's contracture fasciectomy, tendon repair, and ganglion 
cyst removal. According to the extent of injury or deformity, a general
anesthetic, regional anesthetic, monitored anesthetic care (MAC) or local
anesthetic may be used for these hand surgeries. Depending on the injury or
deformity, local anesthesia may not provide sufficient anesthesia, but a general 
anesthesia may not be completely warranted either. Typical elective hand
surgeries performed under regional anesthesia and MAC may be the ideal anesthetic
plan that balances adequate sedation and analgesia. Intravenous regional
anesthesia (IVRA), commonly known as a bier block, is a safe and effective
anesthetic and is typically utilized in uncomplicated hand or forearm surgeries
lasting less than an hour. Intravenous regional anesthesia was first developed by
August Bier in 1908 for anesthesia of the hand and forearm. It is a regional
anesthetic technique that is easy to perform, with success rates up to 98%.
Intravenous regional anesthesia is a simple, reliable and cost-effective
anesthesia technique for short ambulatory hand surgery. The IVRA technique is
ideal for American Society of Anesthesiologists (ASA) class 1 or 2 patients,
which according to ASA classification, are individuals who are healthy with well 
controlled to no comorbidities.The IVRA technique consists of inserting an
intravenous catheter into a peripheral vein of the affected extremity. A double
pneumatic tourniquet is applied to the same arm. The extremity is lifted and
exsanguinated from distal to proximal with an Esmarch bandage. The proximal cuff 
of the tourniquet is then inflated to the appropriate pressure; standard 250mmHg 
for an upper extremity followed by the distal cuff. Insufflation times are
limited to a maximum of one and a half to two hours, whereas the total
insufflation time should never be less than 20 minutes. The Esmarch bandage is
removed, and the local anesthetic is injected via the intravenous catheter to
promote anesthesia in the operative area. In addition to the advantages of IVRA, 
there are disadvantages as well. These disadvantages include, but are not limited
to, local anesthetic (LA) toxicity, delayed onset of action, poor muscle
relaxation, tourniquet pain, and minimal postoperative analgesia. A method for
improving analgesia and IVRA is to add medications to the IVRA solution. The
ideal IVRA should include rapid onset of sensory and motor block, reduced LA
dose, reduced intraoperative and tourniquet pain, prolonged postoperative
analgesia, and minimal side effects.Adjuncts to LA can help offset some of the
disadvantages mentioned above. In a systematic review of adjuncts for intravenous
regional anesthesia conducted by Choyce and Peng, 29 studies were systematically 
reviewed to include various adjuncts to LA in IVRA. Adjuncts studied in this
review included opioids, tramadol, non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
(NSAIDs), clonidine, muscle relaxants, sodium bicarbonate and potassium. The
results of this systematic review suggest that NSAIDs have the most potential to 
offer as adjuncts to IVRA, while opioid adjuncts to IVRA proved to be
disappointing as a form of postoperative analgesia. The search for the optimal
IVRA adjunct that improves analgesia but has limited side effects is ongoing.
More recent studies on adjuncts to IVRA have included medications such as
neostigmine, dexmetomidine, nitroglycerin, and ondansetron.Ondansetron is a
specific 5-hydroxytryptamine-3 (5-HT3 or serotonin) antagonist, commonly used as 
an antiemetic drug for prevention or treatment of postoperative nausea and
vomiting. Used in the recommended dose range, there are minimal reported side
effects, with constipation, dizziness and headache being the most common. 5-HT3
antagonists such as ondansetron possess anti-inflammatory, anesthetic, and
analgesic properties which may have a potential role in decreasing pain. 5-HT3
antagonists participate in the pathway of nociception by interfering with
peripheral effects of serotonin on nociception. By binding to opioid mu receptors
and acting as a potential opioid agonist, the result is a peripheral nociceptive 
analgesic effect. A study by Deegan shows that there are 5-HT3 receptors on the
central spinal terminal, which suggests that ondansetron could have both
peripheral and central nociceptive effects. Ambesh et al. found that pain during 
injection of propofol can be successfully prevented by the administration of 4 mg
of ondansetron. In a study performed by Reddy et al., it was shown that 4 mg of
ondansetron could significantly reduce pain during the intravenous (IV) injection
of rocuronium and propofol.Ondansetron may be useful for its potential
anti-in-ammatory effect as an adjunct to medication to reduce acute inflammation.
Ondansetron can block sodium channels similar to local anesthetics and produce a 
local anesthetic effect. It has been shown to be approximately fifteen times more
potent than lidocaine. A study by Farouk suggests the addition of ondansetron to 
lidocaine may improve the quality of IVRA and prolong postoperative analgesia in 
patients undergoing hand surgery. A study conducted by Honarmand, concluded that 
the addition of ondansetron to lidocaine for IVRA reduced intraoperative and
postoperative analgesic use.Tourniquet pain, which is described as a dull and
aching pain sensation, is caused by the nerve compression from the tourniquet.
Neuropathic pain produced by nerve compression plays an important role in the
etiology of this discomfort. Tourniquet pain is thought to be mediated by impulse
propagation via small, unmyelinated, slow-conducting C fibers. The duration of
the tourniquet time is directly proportional to the onset of tourniquet pain. In 
a study by Asik, onset of tourniquet pain ranged from eight to fifteen minutes.
Tourniquet pain is a well-known limitation of IVRA and is a factor that can limit
the number of times which IVRA can be used for extremity surgery. Lidocaine is
one of the most frequently used LAs for IVRA. It has a relatively brief duration 
of action which may limit the postoperative analgesia. Duration of postoperative 
analgesia, measured as time to first analgesic requirement ranged from 34 to 45
minutes (median) with LA alone.Outcome measures will include pain assessment for 
intraoperative tourniquet pain and postoperative pain measured by first analgesic
requirement time (the time elapsed after tourniquet release to the first request 
by the patient for analgesic). Pain will be assessed with a visual analog scale
(VAS) (0 = no pain and 10 = worst pain imaginable). A VAS score of more than
three would indicate pain threshold has been exceeded.A preliminary search of the
Joanna Briggs Database of Systematic Reviews and Implementation Reports, the
Cochrane Library, CINAHL, PubMed and PROSPERO has revealed that there are
currently no systematic reviews (either published or underway) on the topic of
ondansetron as an adjunct to lidocaine intravenous regional anesthesia. Search
terms included Zofran, ondansetron, intravenous regional anesthesia, and IVRA.
Outcomes of this review will determine if ondansetron, admixed with lidocaine,
has an effect on tourniquet pain, and secondly to determine if ondansetron,
admixed with lidocaine, has an effect on the duration of postoperative analgesia.

DOI: 10.11124/jbisrir-2015-1768 
PMID: 26447005  [PubMed - in process]
