

304. Dermatol Surg. 2014 May;40(5):519-24. doi: 10.1111/dsu.12465. Epub 2014 Mar 7.

Collagenase followed by compression for the treatment of earlobe keloids.

Bae-Harboe YS(1), Harboe-Schmidt JE, Graber E, Gilchrest BA.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Dermatology, School of Medicine, Boston University, Boston,
Massachusetts; Laser & Skin Surgery Center of New York, New York, New York.

BACKGROUND: Many therapeutic options are available for treating keloids, but
success rates vary widely, and the keloids often recur. The Food and Drug
Administration has recently approved intralesional collagenase for the treatment 
of Dupuytren's contracture. This medication has not been explored for the
treatment of earlobe keloids, a common problem.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the safety and clinical efficacy of intralesional
collagenase followed by compression for the treatment of earlobe keloids.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Six earlobe keloids in six patients were injected with a
commercial collagenase preparation. Study participants were asked to use
compression earrings daily thereafter. Patients were examined and photographed
1 day, 2 weeks, 4 weeks, 10 months, and 12 months after injection. Adverse events
were assessed at each visit, and the keloids were measured and photographed.
RESULTS: All patients had a decrease in the size of their earlobe keloid by an
average of 50% (p = .02). Three of the six participants chose to have their
earlobe keloids surgically excised for cosmetic reasons 6, 8, and 11 months after
enrollment, so measurements for data analysis for these patients were taken after
only 1, 1 and 10 months. All participants returned for follow-up at the last
study visit 1 year after study commencement. The three patients who completed the
study were pleased with the improvement of their earlobe keloid, although
complete clearance was not achieved. Side effects included injection site
swelling, tenderness, and one ulceration that spontaneously resolved within
2 weeks.
CONCLUSION: Intralesional collagenase followed by compression appears to be a
safe and modestly effective treatment for earlobe keloids. This approach warrants
further investigation in larger studies with longer follow-up in motivated
patients who decline surgical excision.

© 2014 by the American Society for Dermatologic Surgery, Inc. Published by Wiley 
Periodicals, Inc.

DOI: 10.1111/dsu.12465 
PMID: 24602136  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
