

312. BJU Int. 2012 Jul;110(1):117-21. doi: 10.1111/j.1464-410X.2011.10733.x. Epub 2011
Dec 16.

Safety and tolerability of local treatment with iloprost, a prostacyclin
analogue, in patients with Peyronie's disease: a phase I study.

Pavone C(1), Napoli G, Caruana G, Alonge V, Usala M, Abbadessa D.

Author information: 
(1)Urology Unit, University of Palermo 'P. Giaccone' Policlinic Hospital,
Palermo, Italy. uropa@unipa.it

Study Type - Therapy (case series) Level of Evidence 4 What's known on the
subject? and What does the study add? Peyronie's disease (PD) is an acquired
curvature of the penis attributable to progressive fibromatosis of the tunica
albuginea (TA). It is frequently associated with Dupuytren's contracture and
those of Ledderhose. More recently it was found that patients suffering from PD
also often suffer from diabetes mellitus and gout. Cigarette smoking and the
intake of large amounts of alcohol are considered risk factors for PD.The exact
aetiology of the disease is unknown, however, the trauma hypothesis is shared by 
most authors. According to this theory, repeated sexual microtrauma in people
genetically predisposed could cause PD. The inflammatory process leads to the
formation of fibrosis and plaques. Plaque can lead to penile curvature and may
reduce its functionality. Pain is the most common symptom of early-stage disease.
In the late stages the pain disappears, but erectile dysfunction may occur.
Surgical treatment is available, but this exposes the patient to a greater risk
of erectile dysfunction and it is most frequently associated with a reduction in 
the length of the penis. The rationale for local medical therapy is to use a
treatment that acts on the initial phase of the disease by reducing and stopping 
the processes that lead to fibrosis, thus stabilizing the disease. Systemic
medical therapy is usually accompanied by high rates of recurrence. Many authors 
consider local drug therapy more appropriate. Local treatment consists of several
types of medication, but results are often sub-optimal. Anti-inflammatory or
immunoregulatory therapy, either systemic or topical, has shown some efficacy
when administered early in the disease by modulating the inflammatory response
and attenuating the alteration of tissue repair. Unfortunately, in most cases,
patients are first seen when the plaque is chronically inflamed, stabilized and
sometimes already calcified. We have tested a biological drug for intralesional
administration for the first time. We chose iloprost, an analogue of prostacyclin
I2, for its theoretically favourable properties. If used i.v., it has been shown 
to be effective in treating vascular ischaemic disease such as thromboangioitis
obliterans, peripheral arterial occlusive disease, Raynaud's phenomenon and
systemic sclerosis. The rationale for the therapeutic use of iloprost in the late
stages of PD is based on the assumption that activation of fibrinolysis induced
by the drug would be able to determine a regression of the plaque with a
consequent reduction of the curvature on erection. The main purpose of this phase
I study was to evaluate the safety and tolerability of this drug injected in the 
context of the fibrous plaque on a small number of patients before designing a
large-scale randomized trial. According to the results,therapy with intralesional
iloprost in Peyronie's disease seems to be safe and tolerated and is a possible
alternative to surgery.OBJECTIVE: To assess the safety and tolerability of
intralesional injections of iloprost (an I2 prostacyclin analogue) for its
ability to suppress the production of connective tissue growth factor in
fibroblasts, for the treatment of Peyronie's disease (PD).
PATIENTS AND METHODS: A total of 38 patients with PD were preliminarily assessed 
according to symptoms, the degree of penile curvature and the size and number of 
plaques. Each patient received weekly intralesional injections of iloprost 200 ng
in 1 mL normal saline for 5 weeks. If tolerated, the single dose was increased
weekly to the maximum of 400 ng (2 mL). All the patients were preliminarily
evaluated using at-home photography and were re-evaluated 2 months after the end 
of the treatment regimen. There was no placebo control group in this phase I
study.
RESULTS: Almost all patients showed mild side effects (burning or pain) during
the treatment at the site of injection. All patients tolerated well a iloprost
dose of 200 ng; 19 patients reached a 300 ng dose and 14 tolerated a 400 ng dose 
without showing side effects. A total of 29% of the patients showed an
improvement in curvature.
CONCLUSION: The results show that therapy with intralesional iloprost is a
possible alternative to surgery for Peyronie's disease.

2011 BJU INTERNATIONAL.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1464-410X.2011.10733.x 
PMID: 22176734  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
