

50. BMC Med Genomics. 2012 May 4;5:15. doi: 10.1186/1755-8794-5-15.

Fibroblasts from phenotypically normal palmar fascia exhibit molecular profiles
highly similar to fibroblasts from active disease in Dupuytren's Contracture.

Satish L(1), LaFramboise WA, Johnson S, Vi L, Njarlangattil A, Raykha C,
Krill-Burger JM, Gallo PH, O'Gorman DB, Gan BS, Baratz ME, Ehrlich GD, Kathju S.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Surgery, Division of Plastic Surgery, University of Pittsburgh
Medical Center, Pittsburgh, PA, USA. latsat@hotmail.com.

BACKGROUND: Dupuytren's contracture (DC) is a fibroproliferative disorder
characterized by the progressive development of a scar-like collagen-rich cord
that affects the palmar fascia of the hand and leads to digital flexion
contractures. DC is most commonly treated by surgical resection of the diseased
tissue, but has a high reported recurrence rate ranging from 27% to 80%. We
sought to determine if the transcriptomic profiles of fibroblasts derived from
DC-affected palmar fascia, adjacent phenotypically normal palmar fascia, and
non-DC palmar fascial tissues might provide mechanistic clues to understanding
the puzzle of disease predisposition and recurrence in DC.
METHODS: To achieve this, total RNA was obtained from fibroblasts derived from
primary DC-affected palmar fascia, patient-matched unaffected palmar fascia, and 
palmar fascia from non-DC patients undergoing carpal tunnel release (6 patients
in each group). These cells were grown on a type-1 collagen substrate (to better 
mimic their in vivo environments). Microarray analyses were subsequently
performed using Illumina BeadChip arrays to compare the transcriptomic profiles
of these three cell populations. Data were analyzed using Significance Analysis
of Microarrays (SAM v3.02), hierarchical clustering, concordance mapping and Venn
diagram.
RESULTS: We found that the transcriptomic profiles of DC-disease fibroblasts and 
fibroblasts from unaffected fascia of DC patients exhibited a much greater
overlap than fibroblasts derived from the palmar fascia of patients undergoing
carpal tunnel release. Quantitative real time RT-PCR confirmed the differential
expression of select genes validating the microarray data analyses. These data
are consistent with the hypothesis that predisposition and recurrence in DC may
stem, at least in part, from intrinsic similarities in the basal gene expression 
of diseased and phenotypically unaffected palmar fascia fibroblasts. These data
also demonstrate that a collagen-rich environment differentially alters gene
expression in these cells. In addition, Ingenuity pathway analysis of the
specific biological pathways that differentiate DC-derived cells from carpal
tunnel-derived cells has identified the potential involvement of microRNAs in
this fibroproliferative disorder.
CONCLUSIONS: These data show that the transcriptomic profiles of DC-disease
fibroblasts and fibroblasts from unaffected palmar fascia in DC patients are
highly similar, and differ significantly from the transcriptomic profiles of
fibroblasts from the palmar fascia of patients undergoing carpal tunnel release.

DOI: 10.1186/1755-8794-5-15 
PMCID: PMC3375203
PMID: 22559715  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
