

51. Br Med Bull. 2016 Jun;118(1):149-58. doi: 10.1093/bmb/ldw020. Epub 2016 May 5.

Collagenase clostridium histolyticum in Dupuytren's contracture: a systematic
review.

Smeraglia F(1), Del Buono A(2), Maffulli N(3).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Orthopaedic Surgery, 'Federico II' University of Naples, Naples,
Italy. (2)Department of Orthopaedic and Trauma Surgery, Ospedale Vaio
Fidenza(PR), Fidenza, Italy. (3)Department of Musculoskeletal Disorders, Faculty 
of Medicine and Surgery, University of Salerno, 84081 Baronissi, Salerno, Italy
Centre for Sports and Exercise Medicine, Barts and The London School of Medicine 
and Dentirstry, Mile End Hospital, 275 Bancroft Road, London E1 4 DG, UK
n.maffulli@qmul.ac.uk.

INTRODUCTION: In the last few years, the use of collagenase clostridium
histolyticum for management of Dupuytren's contracture has increased. The
procedure of enzymatic fasciectomy has become popular because it is non-invasive,
safe and fast to perform.
SOURCES OF DATA: A systematic search was performed on Medline (PubMed), Web of
Science and Scopus databases using the combined keywords 'Dupuytren collagenase' 
and 'Dupuytren clostridium histolyticum'. Forty-three studies were identified.
The quality of the studies was assessed using the Coleman Methodological Score.
AREAS OF AGREEMENT: The use of collagenase clostridium histolyticum provides
better outcomes in patients with mild-moderate joint contracture, with lower
complications and side effects than open fasciectomy. Manipulation can be
performed 2-7 days after the injection. The use of collagenase is cost-effective.
AREAS OF CONTROVERSY: Most of the studies did not report patient-related
outcomes. The role of dynamic splint has to be investigated with randomized
clinical trials.
GROWING POINTS: The shorter recovery time and the low incidence of serious or
major adverse effects are the main advantages of this new technology.
AREAS TIMELY FOR DEVELOPING RESEARCH: There is a need to perform studies with
longer follow-up because the recurrence rate seems to increase with time. Further
investigations are necessary to assess whether it is safe and effective to inject
two or more cords at the same time.

© The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For
permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com.

DOI: 10.1093/bmb/ldw020 
PMID: 27151958  [PubMed - in process]
