

64. J Hand Surg Am. 2014 Jul;39(7):1333-1343.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2014.04.029.

Hand function and quality of life before and after fasciectomy for Dupuytren
contracture.

Engstrand C(1), Krevers B(2), Nylander G(2), Kvist J(2).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hand Surgery, Plastic Surgery and Burns, County Council of
Östergötland; Division of Physiotherapy, and Division of Health Care Analysis,
Department of Medical and Health Sciences, Linköping University; Linköping,
Sweden. Electronic address: christina.engstrand@lio.se. (2)Department of Hand
Surgery, Plastic Surgery and Burns, County Council of Östergötland; Division of
Physiotherapy, and Division of Health Care Analysis, Department of Medical and
Health Sciences, Linköping University; Linköping, Sweden.

PURPOSE: To describe changes in joint motion, sensibility, and scar pliability
and to investigate the patients' expectations, self-reported recovery, and
satisfaction with hand function, disability, and quality of life after surgery
and hand therapy for Dupuytren disease.
METHODS: This prospective cohort study collected measurements before surgery and 
3, 6, and 12 months after surgery and hand therapy. Ninety patients with total
active extension deficits of 60° or more from Dupuytren contracture were
included. Outcomes measures were range of motion; sensibility; scar pliability;
self-reported outcomes on expectations, recovery, and satisfaction with hand
function; Disabilities of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand scores; safety and social
issues of hand function; physical activity habits; and quality of life with the
Euroqol.
RESULTS: The extension deficit decreased, and there was a transient decrease in
active finger flexion during the first year after surgery. Sensibility remained
unaffected. Generally, patients with surgery on multiple fingers had worse scar
pliability. The majority of the patients had their expectations met, and at 6
months, 32% considered hand function as fully recovered, and 73% were satisfied
with their hand function. Fear of hurting the hand and worry about not trusting
the hand function were of greatest concern among safety and social issues. The
Disability of the Arm, Shoulder, and Hand score and the Euroqol improved over
time.
CONCLUSIONS: After surgery and hand therapy, disability decreased independent of 
single or multiple operated fingers. The total active finger extension improved
enough for the patients to reach a functional range of motion despite an
impairment of active finger flexion still present 12 months after treatment.
TYPE OF STUDY/LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Therapeutic IV.

Copyright © 2014 American Society for Surgery of the Hand. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2014.04.029 
PMID: 24969497  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
