

66. J Hand Surg Am. 2013 Jul;38(7):1285-94.e2. doi: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2013.04.012.

The effect of night extension orthoses following surgical release of Dupuytren
contracture: a single-center, randomized, controlled trial.

Collis J(1), Collocott S, Hing W, Kelly E.

Author information: 
(1)Department of Hand Therapy, Manukau Super Clinic, Counties Manukau District
Health Board, Auckland, New Zealand. juliecollis@gmail.com

PURPOSE: To clarify the efficacy and detrimental effects of orthoses used to
maintain finger extension following surgical release of Dupuytren contracture.
METHODS: We conducted a single-center, randomized, controlled trial to
investigate the effect of night extension orthoses on finger range of motion and 
hand function for 3 months following surgical release of Dupuytren contracture.
We also wanted to determine how well finger extension was maintained in the total
sample. We randomized 56 patients to receive a night extension orthosis plus hand
therapy (n = 26) or hand therapy alone (n = 30). The primary outcome was total
active extension of the operated fingers (°). Secondary outcomes were total
active flexion of the operated fingers (°), active distal palmar crease (cm),
grip strength (kg), and self-reported hand function using the Disabilities of the
Arm, Shoulder, and Hand questionnaire (0-100 scale).
RESULTS: There were no statistically significant differences between the
no-orthosis and orthosis groups for total active extension or for any of the
secondary outcomes. Between the first postoperative measure and 3 months after
surgery, 62% of little fingers had maintained or improved total active extension.
CONCLUSIONS: The use of a night extension orthosis in combination with standard
hand therapy has no greater effect on maintaining finger extension than hand
therapy alone in the 3 months following surgical release of Dupuytren
contracture. Our results indicate that the practice of providing every patient
with a night extension orthosis following surgical release of Dupuytren
contracture may not be justified except for cases in which extension loss occurs 
after surgery. Our results also challenge clinicians to research ways of
maintaining finger extension in a greater number of patients.

Copyright © 2013 American Society for Surgery of the Hand. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2013.04.012 
PMID: 23790420  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
