

67. J Hand Surg Am. 2012 Oct;37(10):2095-2105.e7. doi: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2012.06.032.
Epub 2012 Aug 30.

Correction of contracture and recurrence rates of Dupuytren contracture following
invasive treatment: the importance of clear definitions.

Werker PM(1), Pess GM, van Rijssen AL, Denkler K.

Author information: 
(1)University of Groningen, University Medical Centre Groningen, The Netherlands.
p.m.n.werker@umcg.nl

PURPOSE: To call attention to the wide variety of definitions for recurrence that
have been employed in studies of different invasive procedures for the treatment 
of Dupuytren contracture and how this important limitation has contributed to the
wide range of reported results.
METHODS: This study reviewed definitions and rates of contracture correction and 
recurrence in patients undergoing invasive treatment of Dupuytren contracture. A 
literature search was carried out in January 2011 using the terms "Dupuytren" AND
("fasciectomy" OR "fasciotomy" OR "dermofasciectomy" OR "aponeurotomy" OR
"aponeurectomy") and limited to studies in English.
RESULTS: The search returned 218 studies, of which 21 had definitions,
quantitative results for contracture correction and recurrence, and a sample size
of at least 20 patients. Definitions for correction of contracture and recurrence
varied greatly among articles and were almost always qualitative. Percentages of 
patients who achieved correction of contracture (ie, responder rate) when
evaluated at various times after completion of surgery ranged from 15% to 96% for
fasciectomy/aponeurectomy. Responder rates were not reported for
fasciotomy/aponeurotomy. Recurrence rates ranged from 12% to 73% for patients
treated with fasciectomy/aponeurectomy and from 33% to 100% for
fasciotomy/aponeurotomy. Review of these reports underscored the difficulty
involved in comparing correction of contracture and recurrence rates for
different surgical interventions because of differences in definition and
duration of follow-up.
CONCLUSIONS: Clearly defined objective definitions for correction of contracture 
and for recurrence are needed for more meaningful comparisons of results achieved
with different surgical interventions.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Recurrence after surgical intervention for Dupuytren
contracture is common. This study, which evaluated reported rates of recurrence
following surgical treatment of Dupuytren contracture, provides clinicians with
practical information regarding expected long-term outcomes of surgical treatment
choices.
TYPE OF STUDY/LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Economic and decision analysis III.

Copyright © 2012 American Society for Surgery of the Hand. Published by Elsevier 
Inc. All rights reserved.

DOI: 10.1016/j.jhsa.2012.06.032 
PMID: 22938804  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
