

7. Clin Sci (Lond). 2015 Oct 1;129(8):711-20. doi: 10.1042/CS20150088. Epub 2015 Jun
11.

Involvement of pro-inflammatory cytokines and growth factors in the pathogenesis 
of Dupuytren's contracture: a novel target for a possible future therapeutic
strategy?

Bianchi E(1), Taurone S(1), Bardella L(2), Signore A(3), Pompili E(4), Sessa
V(5), Chiappetta C(6), Fumagalli L(4), Di Gioia C(7), Pastore FS(8), Scarpa S(9),
Artico M(10).

Author information: 
(1)Department of Sensory Organs, "Sapienza" University of Rome, Rome.
(2)Department of Neurology and Psychiatry, "Sapienza" University of Rome, Rome.
(3)Department of Oncological Sciences, S. Andrea Hospital, "Sapienza" University 
of Rome, Rome. (4)Department of Anatomical, Histological, Forensic and Locomotor 
System Sciences, "Sapienza" Univ. of Rome, Rome. (5)Division of Orthopedics, S.
Giovanni Calibita Fatebenefratelli Hospital, Rome. (6)Department of
Medical-Surgical Sciences and Biotechnologies, "Sapienza" University of Rome,
Latina. (7)Department of Radiology, Oncology and Pathology, "Sapienza" University
of Rome, Rome. (8)Department of Systems Medicine, "Tor Vergata" University of
Rome, Rome. (9)Department of Experimental Medicine, "Sapienza" University of
Rome, Rome, Italy. (10)Department of Sensory Organs, "Sapienza" University of
Rome, Rome marco.artico@uniroma1.it.

Dupuytren's contracture (DC) is a benign fibro-proliferative disease of the hand 
causing fibrotic nodules and fascial cords which determine debilitating
contracture and deformities of fingers and hands. The present study was designed 
to characterize pro-inflammatory cytokines and growth factors involved in the
pathogenesis, progression and recurrence of this disease, in order to find novel 
targets for alternative therapies and strategies in controlling DC. The
expression of pro-inflammatory cytokines and of growth factors was detected by
immunohistochemistry in fibrotic nodules and normal palmar fascia resected
respectively from patients affected by DC and carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS; as
negative controls). Reverse transcription (RT)-PCR analysis and
immunofluorescence were performed to quantify the expression of transforming
growth factor (TGF)-β1, interleukin (IL)-1β and vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) by primary cultures of myofibroblasts and fibroblasts isolated from
Dupuytren's nodules. Histological analysis showed high cellularity and high
proliferation rate in Dupuytren's tissue, together with the presence of
myofibroblastic isotypes; immunohistochemical staining for macrophages was
completely negative. In addition, a strong expression of TGF-β1, IL-1β and VEGF
was evident in the extracellular matrix and in the cytoplasm of fibroblasts and
myofibroblasts in Dupuytren's nodular tissues, as compared with control tissues. 
These results were confirmed by RT-PCR and by immunofluorescence in pathological 
and normal primary cell cultures. These preliminary observations suggest that
TGF-β1, IL-1β and VEGF may be considered potential therapeutic targets in the
treatment of Dupuytren's disease (DD).

© 2015 Authors; published by Portland Press Limited.

DOI: 10.1042/CS20150088 
PMID: 26201022  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
