

70. Needle or Open Fasciotomy for Dupuytren’s Contracture: A Review of the
Comparative Efficacy, Safety, and Cost-Effectiveness – An Update [Internet].

Ottawa (ON): Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health; 2013 Nov.
CADTH Rapid Response Reports.

Dupuytren’s contracture is a progressive condition in which connective cords
form, thicken, and shorten (typically in the connective tissue of the palmar
fascia), causing permanent flexion contractures of joints and of one or more
fingers. The metacarpophalangeal joint (MCP) and the proximal interphalangeal
joint (PIP) are most often affected. Eventually, the contractures lead to hand
deformity and impaired hand function, and potentially reduced quality of life for
the affected individual. Dupuytren’s contracture may present as an unilateral or 
bilateral disease. The primary cause of Dupuytren’s contracture has yet to be
determined, although there is a strong hereditary component. There is no cure for
Dupuytren’s contracture and only a handful of treatment options exist. The most
commonly used treatments are surgery (partial or total fasciectomy), fasciotomy, 
collagenase clostridium histolyticum injections, or corticosteroid injections.
Surgery (especially open, partial fasciectomy [OPF]) is the mainstay treatment
option, which is recommended for functionally impaired patients with contractures
more than 30 degrees of the MCP joint. There is some disagreement as to when
surgery is recommended when PIP joints are affected. There are two types of
fasciotomy: open fasciotomy where the surgeon uses a scalpel to section the
cords, and closed fasciotomy or percutaneous needle fasciotomy (also called
aponeurotomy [PNF]), which involves a minimally invasive technique whereby a
small needle is used to weaken and manipulate the cords. With percutaneous needle
fasciotomy, the cords eventually break after being weakened by means of passive
finger extension. Collagenase clostridium histolyticum (CCH) has recently been
approved by Health Canada as treatment for Dupuytren’s contracture in adults with
a palpable cord. The monthly injection of CCH (up to three injections per
Dupuytren’s cord) hydrolyzes the collagen in the Dupuytren’s cord, thereby
resulting in enzymatic disruption of the cord and release of the contracture. The
objective of this report is to conduct a review of the clinical evidence
regarding open and closed fasciotomy for treating Dupuytren’s contracture
compared with fasciectomy and collagenase clostridium histolyticum. The
cost-effectiveness of the fasciotomy techniques will also be reviewed. This is an
update to a previous Rapid Response report.

PMID: 24741726  [PubMed]
