

79. Handchir Mikrochir Plast Chir. 2014 Dec;46(6):350-4. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1394420.
Epub 2014 Nov 20.

Dupuytren contracture recurrence project: reaching consensus on a definition of
recurrence.

Felici N(1), Marcoccio I(2), Giunta R(3), Haerle M(4), Leclercq C(5), Pajardi
G(6), Wilbrand S(7), Georgescu AV(8), Pess G(9).

Author information: 
(1)Direttore ad interim UOC Chirurgia Plastica e Chirurgie della Mano A.O.R.N.
"San Camillo-Forlanini" Roma - Italy. (2)Instituto Clinico Città di Bressica,
Unità Operativa di Chirurgia della Mano e Microchirurgia Ortopedica, Brescia -
Italy. (3)Chefarzt der Handchirurgie, Plastische Chirurgie und Ästhetische
Chirurgie, Campus Innenstadt und Grosshadern der Ludwig-Maximilians Universität
München - Germany. (4)Head of Department, Plastic and Hand Surgery, Orthopaedic
Clinic, Markgroeningen(Stuttgart) - Germany. (5)Institut de la Main Clinique
Jouvenet, Paris - France. (6)Director Of Hand Surgery Department - St. Joseph
Hospital MultiMedica Group Milan - Italy Plastic Surgery School - University of
Milan Italy. (7)Senior Consultant Department of Hand Surgery Akademiska
University Hospital, Uppsala. (8)Professor in Plastic Surgery and Reconstructive 
Microsurgery University of Medicine Iuliu Hatieganu Spitalul Clinic de Recuperare
Clinic of Plastic Surgery and Reconstructive Microsurgery. (9)Chief, Central
Jersey Hand Surgery, Eatontown, NJ Clinical Senior Instructor, Department of
Orthopedic Surgery, Drexel University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA.

The aim of this study was to determine a definition of recurrence of Dupuytren
disease that could be utilized for the comparison of the results independently
from the treatment used. 24 hand surgeons from 17 countries met in an
international consensus conference. The participants used the Delphi method to
evaluate a series of statements: (1) the need for defining recurrence, (2) the
concept of recurrence applied to the Tubiana staging system, (3) the concept of
recurrence applied to each single treated joint, and (4) the concept of
recurrence applied to the finger ray. For each item, the possible answer was
given on a scale of 1-5: 1=maximum disagreement; 2=disagreement; 3=agreement;
4=strong agreement; 5=absolute agreement. There was consensus on disagreement if 
1 and 2 comprised at least 66% of the recorded answers and consensus on agreement
if 3, 4 and 5 comprised at least 66% of the recorded answers. If a threshold of
66% was not reached, the related statement was considered "not defined". A need
for a definition of recurrence was established. The presence of nodules or cords 
without finger contracture was not considered an indication of recurrence. The
Tubiana staging system was considered inappropriate for reporting recurrence.
Recurrence was best determined by the measurement of a specific joint, rather
than a total ray. Time 0 occurred between 6 weeks and 3 months. Recurrence was
defined as a PED of more than 20° for at least one of treated joint, in the
presence of a palpable cord, compared to the result obtained at time 0. This
study determined the need for a standard definition of recurrence and reached
consensus on that definition, which we should become the standard for the
reporting of recurrence. If utilized in subsequent publications, this will allow 
surgeons to compare different techniques and make is easier to help patients make
an informed choice.

© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.

DOI: 10.1055/s-0034-1394420 
PMID: 25412239  [PubMed - indexed for MEDLINE]
