

87. Plast Reconstr Surg. 2016 Jun;137(6):1800-12. doi: 10.1097/PRS.0000000000002224.

Percutaneous Aponeurotomy and Lipofilling (PALF) versus Limited Fasciectomy in
Patients with Primary Dupuytren's Contracture: A Prospective, Randomized,
Controlled Trial.

Kan HJ(1), Selles RW, van Nieuwenhoven CA, Zhou C, Khouri RK, Hovius SE.

Author information: 
(1)Rotterdam, The Netherlands; and Miami, Fla. From the Department of Plastic and
Reconstructive Surgery and Hand Surgery, and the Department of Rehabilitation
Medicine and Rijndam, Erasmus University Medical Center; and the Miami Hand
Center.

BACKGROUND: As an alternative to needle aponeurotomy release and limited
fasciectomy treatment of Dupuytren's contracture, the authors introduced an
extensive percutaneous aponeurotomy and lipofilling (PALF) procedure. In their
previous study, the authors reported that contractures significantly improved and
most patients returned to normal use of the hand within 2 to 4 weeks. To
establish the safety and efficacy of PALF, the authors compared it to the
standard limited fasciectomy in a single-blind, multicenter, prospective,
randomized, controlled trial.
METHODS: Patients with a primary Dupuytren's contracture were assigned randomly
to the limited fasciectomy group or the PALF group. Patients were measured at
baseline and at 2 weeks, 3 weeks, 6 months, and 1 year postoperatively. Primary
outcome of the trial was contracture correction and convalescence time. Groups
were compared using a mixed models approach.
RESULTS: Eighty patients were randomized to PALF or limited fasciectomy. In both 
groups, almost full metacarpophalangeal joint contracture correction was
obtained, whereas for the proximal interphalangeal joint, some residual
contracture remained. Patients in the PALF group returned significantly earlier
to their normal daily activity. At 1 year after surgery, no significant
differences in recurrence rate or hand function were present. However, limited
fasciectomy seems to have a higher incidence of permanent complications.
CONCLUSIONS: PALF demonstrates a significantly shorter convalescence, similar
operative contracture correction, lower incidence of long-term complications, and
no significant difference regarding 1-year postoperative results compared with
limited fasciectomy. It is therefore a valuable, minimally invasive alternative
to limited fasciectomy in the treatment of Dupuytren's disease.
CLINICAL QUESTION/LEVEL OF EVIDENCE: Therapeutic, II.

DOI: 10.1097/PRS.0000000000002224 
PMID: 27219235  [PubMed - in process]
